---
layout: post
title: I hate non-standard evaluation
description: "non-standard evaluation in R is stupid"
modified: 2014-07-30
---


Non standard evaluation is one of the R language's strange features; I think it's stupid.  Here's some R code that evaluates as you would expect (in a sane way):

{% highlight r %}
df = data.frame(a = "hello world", 
                b = 5, c = FALSE, 
                stringsAsFactors = FALSE)

f = function(x) x
{% endhighlight %}

In the above code I create a dataframe with three 3 columns: a string, numeric and a boolean.  I also define function `f(x)` which simply returns `x`.  

`f(df$a)` = `hello world` <br>
`f(df$b)` = `5` <br>
`f(df$c)` = `FALSE` <br>

When the function argument `x` is evaluated in function `f(x)` it will evaluate `df$a`, `df$b` and `df$c` and look in the dataframe and give the information in the correct column of the dataframe.

Let's rewrite `f(x)` so that it works with non-standard evaluation (the insane way):

{% highlight r %}
f = function(x) deparse(substitute(x))
{% endhighlight %}
`f(x)` now no longer evaluates `df$a`, `df$b` or `df$c` when they are passed in as arguments:

`f(df$a)` = `df$a` <br>
`f(df$a)` = `df$b` <br>
`f(df$a)` = `df$c` <br>

Instead `substitute(x)` will capture the input as an expression without evaluating it and `deparse(x)` will turn this expression into a string.
 
Why is non-standard evaluation annoying?  If the non-standard evaluation version of `f(x)` is some important function I need to call but my input is stored in a data frame or list (as in the above example) then I'm going to have a bad day.

`library()` is an example of a real R function that uses non-standard evaluation.  `library(randomForest)` and `library("randomForest")` both evaluate correctly.  But if you have `string = "randomForst"`, then `library(string)` will try to load the "string" library.  This will come into play if you use something like the shiny package where a lot of input from the UI comes from `input$ui_object`.  See [this issue](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/manipulatr/SBRIOQpAz_0) with shiny and non-standard evaluation.

Non-standard evaluation allows you to capture expressions and do things like avoid using quotations when naming dataframe columns.  Are quotations really that much of a hassle to add to your code?  This is especially true for a language where the puritanical users prefer the `<-` assignment operator instead of `=`.  Do the non-evaluation shortcuts makeup for all the hoops you need to jump through?

I'm sure there's some clever hack to get around the non-standard evaluation in the above examples.  But this is still an annoying complication introduced by an advanced "feature".
